Oh, we're back.
Yes, sir.
Jumping up and down.
Sorry.
Good morning, thank you
all.
All right, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Very good. All right. Good morning, Minister.
Welcome along to the estimates hearing for Vote Defense and Vote Defense Force.
Your first time in the main chair for this, appreciate
that, and congratulations again on that opportunity.
Welcome also to Chief of Defense Force, Air Marshal Tony Davies, and
Secretary of Defense, Brooke Berrington, and your respective teams.
We have two hours set down for the hearing today.
We welcome comments from you. You'll have seen the
proposed agenda, giving a broad outline of the sections we'd
like to cover. We'll work our way through that, but of course,
maintaining flexibility to focus on areas of priority for
members of the committee as we go. But I'd like to hand over to you for some
introductory comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Morena, good morning to all the members of the committee.
I'm really delighted to have this opportunity to tell the stories of
the wonderful work that Defense does for New
Zealand. Of course, I'm delighted to be here with the Chief of
Defense Force and the Secretary of Defense, as you've rightly acknowledged.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And of course,
right behind us, so to speak, but also quite literally, I'll have them to excuse my
back,
many good men and women of the New Zealand Defense Force, the Ministry of
Defense. And I'd be remiss if I didn't start by acknowledging the work
that our uniformed personnel, along with Defense civilians, and of course, MOD
team, do in defense of our nation.
I'm grateful personally to them, of course, on behalf of government, and I know
that across the Parliament there's a strong and rightful recognition of
that. And can I say, I've always had really good interactions
with this committee. I do want to acknowledge, if you'll indulge me for a moment,
relatively new in his counterpart role, Honorable Damien O'Connor.
And for the last time that we'll do this together, Mr. Gregor O'Connor.
So thank you for the opportunity to interact with the committee on these important
matters. I'll keep my opening remarks really brief, because obviously I welcome the
opportunity for the questions and comments that the committee may have.
But through you, Mr. Chair, I'd also respectfully suggest that if we were to
give an equivalent opportunity to both of these gentlemen, that would be helpful
to set the scene. In terms of the recent budget, which is, of course,
nominally the focus of today's session, I was pleased that Budget
2026 reflected the government's commitment to
support Defense to do the important work that it does.
Of course, there was the headline figure of the $1.58
billion expenditure, broken down to $700 and
$880 million worth of capital and operating
expenditure. And of course, within that, a number of key aims need to
be met.
Some of those revolve around new platforms
for the particular effects, and we can obviously talk about that in
as much detail as you wish. But of course, also investing in our people
is crucially important. So I was pleased that we have been
able to state clearly that we will focus on
ensuring that we retain, particularly retain, yes, continue to recruit, but
also retain the
sailors, soldiers, and aviators that we need to continue to deliver the
important effects
through our Defense Force. And included in that is, of course,
continuing to improve the defense estate and infrastructure, particularly where
accommodation is concerned. That is an aspect of the
preparedness of our people to serve, so it's important that we continue to invest
strongly in that regard. I will say that for me personally, that's
something of a passion project. I was very pleased to have been given
the delegation, among a couple of others, for defense
estate and infrastructure in my previous role as Associate Minister of Defense, of
course, under our colleague and friend, former colleague now, the Honorable
Judith Collins, of course, in her new role as Minister of Defense.
So I'm pleased to be able to
do my honest attempt to continue to carry on that good
work. So with that, Mr. Chair, through you, I will
say again that I look forward to interacting with yourselves.
And I look actually across the committee, and I see no fewer than three
fellow parliamentarians who have worn the uniform in one
color or another, including a couple of ex-Army Territorial
Force officers and, of course, ex-Wing Commander Crossley.
So to you and of course, all members of the committee, look forward to our
discussion today.
Thank you.
Did you wish to have opening remarks from the Secretary of Defense?
Yeah, if it's okay with you, I'll pass to Chief of Defense Force
and or the Minister, excuse me, Secretary of Defense.
Okay, shall I go?
You go.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and members.
Thank you for this opportunity to address the committee.
Ministry of Defense has been tasked with preparing and equipping a defense force
that can respond to the various challenges that New Zealand may face.
Whether that's supporting communities impacted by severe weather events or
deploying in support of our collective security interests,
it's a responsibility we take seriously.
That's why we are focused on three things, three main things.
Delivering the 2025 Defense Capability Plan
Working with our partners to ensure that our bonds, which are based on
trust, are strong and resilient, and working with
industry to deliver capability faster, but without losing
rigor.
We are focused on delivering existing defense projects to time, while
providing value for money and innovative thinking.
And we are also progressing the first of the two-year reviews of the Defense
Capability Plan in 2027.
It's what we're focused on at the moment.
I now hand over to the Chief of the Defense Force.
Thank you, Secretary, and thank you to the Chair and to committee for the
opportunity to be here today and to make some opening remarks.
The New Zealand Defense Force is responding to a more volatile, a
more contested, and a less predictable world
by sharpening our focus on readiness,
our operational delivery, and working very closely with our partners.
Keeping our core purpose firmly in focus
is critical in order for us to provide the right
options to government, credible combat
capable options.
That means behind the scenes, lifting readiness across the force,
embedding a stronger war fighting ethos, and preparing for more
demanding operations alongside our partners if
needed.
At the same time, the New Zealand Defense Force continues to
deliver at pace. We are active across domestic,
regional, and global operations.
We're protecting our maritime approaches.
We're contributing to
longstanding, ongoing international missions.
And we are responding whenever New Zealanders need us most.
These tasks increasingly overlap,
and they require a defense force that is flexible,
responsive, and able to shift quickly between
roles and tasks.
We are rebuilding and strengthening the foundations of the Defense Force.
Our people are central to everything we do,
and effort is going into stabilizing the workforce,
generating critical skills, and ensuring our personnel and their families
are properly supported, because readiness ultimately
depends on them.
Alongside this, we are bringing in new capabilities and making the
most of recent investments.
This includes new technologies,
strengthening maritime capability in particular, and
increasing our interoperability with partners through
both training and operations.
All of this is being delivered with a clear focus on urgency,
but also
value for money,
and ensuring effort and resources are not wasted
and directed where they have the greatest impact on
operational readiness.
In short,
the NZDF is actively adapting to meet the demands
set by government,
delivering today while building the capability and readiness
required for the challenges ahead. Thank you.
Very good. All right. Thank you very much. We'll jump straight into it.
So now with the overview of appropriations, first question from the Honorable
David.
Look, thank you very much and welcome to the committee, and
congratulations on getting more money, I guess, for defense in
a very tight budget.
But as was said, one of the big challenges is retention.
That is the personnel, which is the heart and soul of course, of
any defense force.
And when I look down at the additional funding that has gone in,
$43.5 million
for cost increases just to develop a plan,
and only $30 million
for remuneration.
So my question to you is, have we still got our priorities wrong in actually
looking after the people on the ground,
their salaries, their conditions, and in fact, their housing, which is
acknowledged,
the basic conditions, is still something that we are undercooking,
or you are in the budget in our approach?
Yeah. Thank you very much for the question.
I think it's a very
reasonable and appropriate line of questioning, that we
must ensure that our personnel are sufficiently well looked after to
wish to continue to serve. Of course, that's not just a matter of
doing the right thing by our people, but of course, the personnel
whom we rely upon to operate in the
different domains
will enable us to be operationally effective.
I would say that across the four-year
envelope of funding identified in the budget, that with
$174 million to meet the cost increase to ensure that the
personnel and equipment are ready to deploy,
along with 120 million to bring Defense Force pay closer to
market rates, and I emphasize closer, point to which I'll return briefly
finally.
And also to meet non-discretionary remuneration increases, that which is
effectively automatic or determined externally.
I think it's fair to say that we have made a visible commitment in this
space. Of course, it's always possible to say that more can and
should be done. But for now, I'm pleased that we are making
steps in the right direction.
And more particularly on the question of pay rates being brought
closer to market rates, it seems to me that for
reasons of
funding levels over many years, successive governments,
that we have some catching up to do.
I'm pleased that we are making steps in the right direction.
But as with the Defense Capability Plan itself, broadly across all
the different categories of investment that we need, we identify that
ongoing work is needed. And indeed, that has been the commitment of the government
through Defense Capability Plan 2025, to
continue to increase as necessary to ensure that those defense aims are met
As I say, with people being an important part, and as you've quite rightly
acknowledged along the same lines.
Can I
then just step back from that, highlighting the importance, I guess, of people all
the way through.
Defense Capability Plan, very bold, ambitious statements made at
the launch of that, and I know now the minister's
moved on to
greener pastures and left the mantle with you.
2% of GDP is an ambitious task,
and it's a lot of money.
How well are you going in
maintaining that trajectory?
Yeah . Thanks for the question. Of course, it's important that we do as we
say, and following those important statements made by my
predecessor on behalf of government with the release of Defense Capability Plan
2025, hereafter DCP.
I think it's fair to say that we know that we need to
ensure that our actions match our words.
So far, that has been the case, with around the
1.2% of GDP mark now representing the trajectory,
very much tracking the line that you would expect between two points of,
roughly speaking, 1% of GDP, to the 2%
mark in the year 2032, 2033. So we are on the right path,
but we do need to stay that course, and we're conscious of that.
Supplementary from-
Yes
... the supplementary on that.
Just acknowledging the comments my colleague's made around the
defense estate. I think it's quite timely as well, and it's been brought up by the
committee a number of times. My supplementary is around
what plans you have in place to making sure that we can retain
soldiers, sailors, aviators,
and trying to insulate them from
getting overseas to Australia, given the Australian Defense Force has got superior
pay and better conditions of service.
Yeah. Thank you very much. I think,
again, if I may say, a really astute question.
We're very mindful of the need to recruit well
and
it might be that the committee would wish to hear from the Chief of Defense
Force and/or chief people officer in terms of personnel numbers
coming in.
I won't steal their thunder except to say only that there is a good story to be
told there. In terms of then retaining personnel, including with
the potential attractiveness of other options within the New
Zealand workforce or indeed overseas, I think there are a number of different ways
that we need to approach that question.
One is that we need to make it worth a young
Kiwi, or indeed a mid-career
worker who might wish to
see a life in service as having great benefits for them
at a later stage of life. To think about the reasons that they join, and
to make sure that it's worthwhile, but also that they will be properly
resourced and equipped to do the things that they consider worthwhile.
And part of that does go to deployments and other opportunities,
recognizing they put their hand up to serve specifically for that
reason. In terms of looking after them well,
again, between us already, we've touched on some themes around
housing. But I'd also say the balance of the
estate in terms of training and even operational
facilities need to be invested in.
There is a considerable work program along those lines.
For example, in relation to Devonport Naval Base.
And clearly, we need to be mindful of the need to offer
opportunities too, in terms of people being well
skilled and equipped for doing the role that they can within the New Zealand
Defense Force. Of course, I don't want to undermine the essential point from a
defense point of view that we need to have
smart, talented, hardworking individuals, and we do, operating in
teams, of course. But I also think that the Defense Force,
when it plays a role for the benefit of New Zealand Inc.
of providing values and ethics and
work ethic and particular skills that are valuable to us as a whole,
then when they leave the service and go to do other things,
on New Zealand soil, we hope,
that's a net benefit to New Zealand as well.
A quick supplementary, Tim Costley.
Yeah. Encouraging, Minister, listening to some of these questions.
I agree with your point it's not just money. They want an adventure, right?
We've got to give it to them. But are you open to sort of
cross-party support to get all parties coming
out and saying, "Yes, we want to see more funding for defense.
We support that significant injection, that 2%.
We
support deployments." Is that-
Yeah. I think that's a really good question.
I will say that I've been very pleased with the
nature of the interaction and also the tone of the interaction with opposition
parties. Opposition with a capital O, only in a technical sense within the
parliamentary context, of course.
I think there is a broad agreement across the political aisle at the moment,
reflecting the social license that's now present within the New Zealand
public for
properly equipping our Defense Force to do things that are important in the
increasingly uncertain and dangerous world in which we live.
I would say, of course, that the point that
underlies Mr. Costley's question is a very important one.
I think it would be helpful if we continue to see that degree of
support
for our Defense Force, recognizing, of course, not
only that there is value in a deterrent effect
being available when, of course, we ourselves, and
in conjunction with allies, partners, and friends, demonstrate that we're able
to defend our ideals and interests.
But also, of course, recognizing all the other ways in which the
Defense Force helps to keep New Zealand and
our cousins in the Pacific, and others around the world, safe.
An example, of course, would be search and rescue operations.
I think sometimes we make the mistake of considering these to be business as usual,
but of course for the-
Souls who are saved by
maritime patrol aircraft identifying, for example,
those who are stricken at sea, and save lives,
sometimes of New Zealanders, sometimes of other nationalities.
These are hugely important roles that our defence force can play.
So the ongoing support for defence to play those roles,
I think would be very welcome indeed.
I think our men and women in uniform particularly always notice,
and are appreciative when support is forthcoming, in a
non-political way, but of course, from the political level of government
decision-making.
At this point, I wonder actually, Mr.
Chair, if you'll allow me to pass to the Chief of Defence Force actually to provide
a real life worked example of very recent past
along exactly those lines.
Please.
Thank you. Just summarizing several of the minister's questions about
people,
I would assure the committee that the attrition
of several years ago, largely driven by COVID,
through the COVID period,
has stabilized.
Between our uniformed and civilian
workforce at the moment, we are sitting at just under
8.5%, and it's been like that for the last year.
And we think that that's a reasonably healthy
level of turnover for an organization
or a workforce, a defence force.
The
fact that the attrition has slowed doesn't mean it won't stay low
forever. There are periodic and cyclic draws and
demands which will see that fluctuate.
The problem we're left with, though, is that that high attrition left
some major gaps
throughout our sailors, soldiers, and aviators, right from
the junior
levels of people that are fully trained and competent to do their jobs, right up
to our most senior people. The challenge
for us now is to fill those gaps and you
can't just obviously go out and
recruit
a ship's captain
or a P-8 pilot or a head of engineering
in the machine shop,
and expect them to be able to deploy a few minutes later.
They need to be grown from the ground up.
So we're putting quite a lot of effort into
recruiting the right people as fast as we can within the parameters that are set
for us, which includes budget, but also on
retention. Quite a few of these measures that
appear in the Budget '26 are going
into
focusing on retention.
But it's a very delicate balance, and it needs careful
prioritization. Every dollar we get needs to be split
five ways between people,
between equipment,
infrastructure that's aged, failing, or we need new types of
infrastructure,
and
operating itself, as well as software and systems like that.
So it's a very
difficult
equation to balance, and there is never enough resource to go in.
We can't just put all our money into people is what I'm saying.
We still need to be able to operate.
And then finally, it's not just
pay that retains people, although it's very important.
As
Mr. Kosti said, it's the conditions of service,
it's deployments,
it's sense of purpose and job satisfaction.
There's the people factors around teamwork and morale and leadership.
So there's a lot that goes into retention other than just pay
in the pocket, although that is fundamentally important.
Right. Was your question in relation to the overview or
Yeah, it was sort of a follow-up on one of the comments made.
Okay.
So, Minister,
as we're aware of the comments made by the Americans around pushing us
up to 3.5% spend as well,
I think the term they used is freeloader.
And so I'm wondering what you've got in place to insulate us from
those types of expectations,
from allies, partners, friends,
in terms of the cost of living crisis that we're in.
As you know, where every dollar we spend someplace means there's less of a dollar
to spend on our crumbling health structure,
support needed in schools, so on and so forth.
So I wonder if you've got any plan on how to, first of all, manage that situation
with them.
But secondly, if you've got any plans that you can share with the
committee.
Yeah . Thank you very much. Clearly, there's a lot in that question.
Perhaps I can start by acknowledging the fundamental point that social
license is important, and we've touched on that already, in
terms of the understanding of the New Zealand public about the world in which we're
living and the importance of playing our part, including through defense.
Clearly, there is an opportunity cost for every dollar that's spent on defense as
compared with health or education services, as you've alluded
to. Obviously, I wouldn't agree with your characterization of our health
system, but that's another story for another day and another select committee.
For the purpose of making sure we invest
in defense, clearly the
operational outputs are
the key driver, but actually, I think it is possible to say that we are able to
achieve more than one aim at once, to the extent that we
see additional defense investment as an opportunity for New Zealand defense
industry. I think the economic growth potential, including through skills,
employment, including in our regions-
Is considerable. And if we take a
thoughtful approach to the additional expenditure,
then it will be possible to realize benefits for the New
Zealand public that go beyond the
straightforward, but obviously significant
outcomes that can be achieved under what you would traditionally think of as a
defense heading. Certainly through the defense industry strategy, we
outlined our intention to do exactly that, and there's detail
that we can get into, if you should wish,
about encouraging New Zealand industry in itself,
both to provide sovereign
and homegrown
ways of providing to our defense force.
Of course, if we can encourage them and assist them to export to
like-minded nations, I hasten to add, to provide
their
services and suppliers elsewhere, that's a good thing as well.
And of course, again, those general economic benefits that accrue when we
have
New Zealand taxpayer dollars
supporting New Zealand industry.
Where dual use is concerned, as well as strictly military
applications, of course, in technological terms, advances in
uncrewed technology can be helpful, for example, for agriculture
or other ways of
Kiwis
making a dollar and providing goods and services to their fellow Kiwis.
And that's not inconsistent with the surveillance or search that might
take place from the same unmanned aerial vehicles, for example.
So, that's one category. I think the social license is important.
At a broad level, of course, in terms of New Zealand's independent foreign policy,
that will be a subject that will be more helpfully explored with the Minister of
Foreign Affairs, whom I understand you'll be meeting with later.
But I think that's worthwhile just to place in context that any discussions with
the United States of America or any other sovereign nation,
of course,
are subject to that general understanding and agreement that we have as New
Zealanders, that we have an independent foreign policy. We are a sovereign nation.
We do make our own decisions as to the way that we deploy our defense
force, but of course, also the decisions we make ourselves with that.
In terms of the
reflections about appropriate levels of defense expenditure,
as I say, the New Zealand Government, on behalf of the New Zealand people, makes
its own decisions in that regard. We have come to the conclusion as a government,
and as I say, grateful for the fact that it appears to be broadly supported,
that 2% of our GDP expenditure is the right level for
us to attain by the year 2032/33, and that's why we're
getting on and doing exactly that.
I would actually just say, in relation to the comments reported,
made by Secretary of War Pete Hegseth at the same
dialogue, defense dialogue that I attended recently, that my response,
very shortly following the remarks that he made, was along the lines that we
have the best people, and I hear that consistently, and others have heard
that too, in terms of
our Navy, Army, and Air Force.
We are present everywhere. And yes, we know that our platforms do
need upgrading and indeed replacing in some cases.
But again, that's a decision we've already made in terms that we are
comfortable with.
Right.
I guess probably my concern there is if they continue
to push,
and we concede to them, then they'll ask for something else, and they'll ask for
something else. So, if you could give the committee comfort that
whenever these things arise, with the Americans in particular,
that is the position that you'll be sharing with them.
Yeah. I'm happy to restate
the comments that I have made since that Shangri-La Dialogue, and even as
recently as a couple of minutes ago.
Happy to state very clearly for the record that the position of this government
is that we will make decisions that we consider to be the
right ones for the New Zealand people and that our ideals and interests,
consistent with our independent foreign policy in terms of the deployment of any
such assets.
And that the comments or the views of other nations
are interesting so far as they go, but they're not determinative of the
positions and the decisions that we make.
Okay. I've got a quick supplementary from Damien O'Connor-
Yeah, please
... and then we'll jump into the more substantive discussion on DC.
Thank you. Well, it's really on the one of expenditure.
Have you set a guideline on procurement so
that New Zealand industry and New Zealand manufacturing
and other parts of our economy will have access to some opportunities?
And if so, what is the KPI that you're going to set?
Yeah. There's much that we can say and have been doing along those lines.
To avoid hearing my voice for two hours straight, perhaps at this point I might
look in the direction of Secretary of Defense for any comments he might want to
make.
Thank you, Minister. Yes, is the short answer.
For example,
prime suppliers, so you're kind of talking about Lockheed Martin or the
kind of big multinationals now have to develop a national capability
plan that says what economic return will come to New
Zealand from a purchase. It's assessed against other bids.
It has a 10% weighting minimum.
So, if you're taking a whole lot of factors, price and schedule and competence,
there's a significant weighting around what are they going to
deliver to New Zealand and New Zealand industry.
That's the first
point. The second is a whole lot of kind of related,
if you think about an ecosystem, so a
technology accelerator to try and kickstart New Zealand firms
into that higher tech area. The ability for New Zealand firms
themselves to be what are called thin primes, which is to act as a
prime, to act as the major contractor, and then
subcontract to Lockheed Martin, not the other way around.
That's another step we're taking to try and reinforce
New Zealand industry. So, there's a
range of-
Of interventions which are now in place to ensure,
if I come back to your opening question around bipartisanship and social
licence, New Zealanders have to know that a proportion of
that defence spend is going back into the pockets of
New Zealanders, and we're very alert to that and acting
accordingly.
Thank you.
Just to reiterate, as we build the case or the acquisition
program for a new capability that we need,
compatibility and interoperability with Australia is one of the first
questions we ask. But also right up there in those first questions is,
is this capability available in New Zealand already, or can we help New
Zealand companies develop and field this
capability for us? And we're
really behind that.
If I could just add, sorry, to that answer.
One of the things that we have tended to do in defence over decades is to say we
want to buy a ship,
so we look for a ship.
And sometimes it does have to be a ship or a
maritime helicopter.
But increasingly, we're wanting to go to New Zealand industry and
industry more generally to say, "This is the
effect we want.
We want to be able to deliver humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief across a coral atoll.
You tell us how that might best be done." That gives New Zealand
industry a better chance to play in a space that they are
better at, which is not building frigates, but coming up
with innovative ideas to deliver effect.
So we're trying to have open-ended questions at the start
so that New Zealand industry can say, "Well, hang on.
It doesn't just have to be the big players here.
There's a chance for us to come up with something novel,
and let's pitch it
to the government."
Very good. On that, I think that's a good opportunity to talk
more about the opportunity of uncrewed systems and drone-type technologies,
obviously, in
regards to your comments there,
SecDef, around
not specifying the
physical capability, but more the outcome.
What
aspect or what role do you see these systems playing and
New Zealand industry within there?
We've got some great new companies doing some incredible work
already domestically here, and obviously that's a part of the
DCP as well.
Yeah. It's a great opportunity to give effect
to that broad
structure of decision-making that the Secretary of Defence has
quite rightly outlined,
because it's now the case, particularly through uncrewed technologies,
that
we have the ability to answer questions about the kind of effect we want to provide
in a way that reflects the availability of
platforms that aren't necessarily large, so-called exquisite platforms
that can be all things to all people.
And so I think across the different domains,
in air,
on the surface of the sea, the subsurface, and of course,
land-based drones,
which is to say
some kind of uncrewed, unmanned, autonomous, or remotely controlled systems.
We have
those in New Zealand already producing that.
And in addition to saying that this technology exists in New Zealand,
is used in a dual-use fashion already for
other purposes.
Also, it's been employed elsewhere in the defense sense by New Zealand companies,
for example, in defense of Ukraine against
Russia's illegal invasion of that nation.
I think it's worth encouraging
the continued development
through the mechanism of the Defense Technology Accelerator that SecDef
has referred to. But of course, by engaging
closely with understanding
and ultimately where appropriate contracting with such
business entities. The Defense Capability Plan, as I sense we're sort
of moving towards that particular section of the
hearing,
does include provision for assistant surveillance, as
it's known,
and including
maritime, well, air surveillance, excuse me, of
regions
very far south of New Zealand to be polar capable in terms of that
capability. Often, of course, we think about New Zealand as
a series of islands on a map. Beyond that, we have, of course, our
territorial sea at 12 nautical miles, 200 nautical mile exclusive
economic zone, the massive search and rescue area out to the Pacific.
But we need to be mindful too, and continue to be present in the Antarctic
to protect, of course, New Zealand's scientific endeavors in that part of the
world. So if the committee's minded to hear more about
what kind of capability could be provided with those uncrewed technologies,
then Chief of Defense Force or his delegates would be more knowledgeable, of
course, than me. But I'll leave that to you, Mr.
Chair-
Sure
... as to whether you want to call him now.
Yeah, please.
I'd point immediately to the great success we've had
with our initial foray into uncrewed systems,
commercially known as the Bluebottle, but our Navy has
shared acquisition with other agencies in New Zealand of
two uncrewed systems that have been out and
about
New Zealand waters and the waters of our friends in the
Pacific and the waters in between.
Just to give you an example of that,
the two vessels we've named Tahia
and Rua,
have spent 221 days- At sea on behalf of
defence, customs, and police.
They have processed hundreds of contacts of vessels of interest
in the time that we have had them.
That includes up in Fiji,
with maritime domain awareness there of vessels that are moving,
either for good reason or suspiciously in and out of the EZs
of Fiji. Used
extensively, in particular up in Northland for the
seasonal yacht arrival
period,
and also
in the Bay of Plenty respectively.
So they
started as a trial, and they've been incredibly successful.
Some of the funding increase that came out of budget '26
will go into acquiring more of those vessels, similar vessels there.
But also,
our next immediate project is to develop an uncrewed system
that can operate in the Southern Ocean and the waters down there that are
notoriously hard to monitor on the
surface.
Further down track, we have, as the minister referred
to, bigger and bolder uncrewed systems that
can fly for longer, sail for longer, cover more
area with more sensors,
and we will continue to develop those.
As a maritime nation, there's an obvious role for
uncrewed systems either on the surface,
above the surface, or under the surface.
And we've got,
over the next few years, a lot of plans underway to
develop those.
I would just say also, though, that uncrewed systems or
drones are not the panacea.
They
have a lot of limitations, so you need to be careful where you use them.
You use them where safety is a factor.
You use them where long endurance or
persistence is a factor.
And
there are certain performance advantages as well that would come from drones.
But there is a tendency, from what I can see, to immediately go for what is
the uncrewed solution here, because a lot of the time it won't be
cheaper and it won't
involve less people, because there's always a lot of people back
onshore operating, maintaining these things.
The other thing to keep in mind with drones that are operating far from New Zealand
is you need the coverage
up above in terms of satellites to be able to communicate with,
get the mission data, and give the directions to the uncrewed systems.
They're great for coastal waters, for instance,
but we've still got work to do there as well in terms of satellite coverage and
communicating with these things long range.
And that takes more funding and projects to do.
Supplementary, Teanaru Turima.
Yeah. Actually got kind of questions that probably might be
answered by two of yous. One of them was around a
conversation that we had at annual reviews around there being a kind of a
fund,
because you're procuring untested technology.
I mean, drones, five years ago, you could put one up and then you'd go, "Really
expensive, mate. Hook them up to JB Hi-Fi
at cheaper cost." So if you could clarify for us
in what kind of measures that you've got in place to ensure that you're getting the
best bang for buck,
in terms of that
approach,
reflecting back to what we've said during annual reviews.
And my other question is around that
relationship in the Pacific. As you know, there are a lot of issues in the
Pacific. There's now narco submarines
cruising around in the Pacific. Some of our Pacific neighbors don't
have the same capability of them, and so I'm interested in terms of
the relationships there in terms of dealing with issues around
IUU, illegal and unreported fishing, et
cetera. So how those relationships might be tracking in terms
of drone technology.
Yeah. Thank you. Perhaps I can have the first bite of the cherry, and others may
wish to add. In terms of that second piece, I think,
the potential for surveillance to assist with
illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing activity is a
subject dear to the hearts of Pacific Island nations.
In terms of the overall context of our relationship with
those in the South Pacific, again, Mr.
Peters would be more broadly knowledgeable about those.
But certainly, in a defense sense, I know that talking with the
other
defense ministers or
nations
with those, without defense forces, I know there's
a strong desire that they've expressed to continue to work with us
for the aims of protecting their fishery resources,
of course, against transnational organized crime, including but not limited
to the transportation of illegal drugs
and other contraband, I should add.
And so to me, it's very healthy within our
relationships to be able to offer something that does provide such great
value as persistent surveillance.
So in that sense, it's no different from the general way that we would
conduct ourselves as a nation, which is respectfully,
which is
in a spirit of collaboration with those Pacific
Island nations. Many of the challenges and opportunities that they have as
island nations
in the Pacific Ocean are the same as this Pacific island has
in
that body of water, too. So I think there's an immediate and obvious connection
between us, and you see that in a bilateral sense, but also in groupings and
gatherings such as the South Pacific Defense Ministers meeting that's
traditionally attended by New Zealand defense ministers.
I'm trying to recall your, the first question you raised.
It was around this, we had a discussion around annual reviews, around-
Ah
... technology. Given that it's so new and sometimes you've got to buy something-
Yeah. Right
... this might be a dud.
Right.
So what have you got in place to make sure that you're on track?
Thanks very much, Minister. Part of the story is the technology accelerator,
which I'll
defer to the Chief of the Defense Force. But I'll just say a couple of things.
First of all, on the Pacific,
I really think it's important we frame this
in a non-parochial way, and you didn't, and your response didn't.
But quite a lot of the public narrative is to suggest that the Pacific is
somehow out there.
Well, Tokelau, which is a part of the realm, for which we have constitutional
responsibilities, is north of Samoa.
That's not just there. That is a long way away.
Niue is a long way away. Cook Islands is a long way away.
So this notion that we are somehow distant from trouble
is a very New Zealand, mainland-centric view of the world.
We have realm responsibilities. We have legal
responsibilities under the Antarctic Treaty system.
We have supply chains that go through, oh, I don't know, the Straits of
Hormuz or the Straits of Malacca, where we might have an interest.
We have critical undersea infrastructure that provides us with
our smartphone IT. So I just think this
notion that somehow New Zealand is this
southwest Pacific nation, and something's happening out there-
A strategic environment
... and we're kind of protected by distance-
I'll leave that with you
... is not helpful. On technology,
three things, apart from the technology accelerator.
The first is this, as I said earlier, saying through the Defense
Capability Plan, we're giving firms transparency about the
sort of capability we're looking to buy over a long
period. That gives firms, New Zealand firms, a chance to
plan
and to develop their own product in order to bid into that.
So it's a roadmap which provides transparency.
Secondly, by being clear about the effect that we want, rather than the actual kit
that we want to buy, again, gives firms a chance to be flexible in
what they might put to market or put to government.
The third thing is firms themselves.
They are responding to those incentives.
So there are lots of firms out there now basically saying,
"We are developing this. We have developed this.
Have you thought about this?"
In a completely appropriate way, but firms are basically responding to the signals
in the way that you would expect
a well-run firm in an open and transparent economy to be doing.
So there's quite a lot going on in that space.
The specific issue you raised was the technology accelerator, which
I'll leave to the CDN.
Just out of interest, when I checked about five years ago, there were
22,000 different types of airborne drones alone-
Oh, dear
... around the world. I imagine that figure is a lot higher
since then. It is very easy for people even in their homes to
assemble and build drones of all kinds of
capability and intent. So I'd just
quickly say that a lot of our
technology accelerator initial work will be focusing on
counter-drone
technology as well, and making sure that our sailor soldiers, aviators, and
our defense estate and valuable assets are protected by
those that would wish us harm through some of these readily
available drones, either off the shelf or ones they build
themselves. But in terms of our
use of drones, I mentioned before some of the
long-range over-water uses that we have and that are very welcomed
by the likes of Fiji, Tonga,
protecting against illegal fishing and
surveilling illegal
vessels coming in and out of their waters.
That is a really strong area of interest for us.
Disaster relief is another area. I was up on the ground myself with our sailor
soldiers and aviators back in, earlier in the year when the heavy weather
hit-
Right
... the East Cape and north of there,
and saw our crews working with heavy equipment to clear
roads, helicopters to move stuff around.
But there was one case in particular where they needed to get
across to a place that was only 500 meters away but could not because
the bridge
was knocked out, and a NH90 helicopter would have caused such a
downdraft to drop off the thing there that it was a
non-player. So what we thought at that point is it'd be great
to have a drone that could pick up a few barrels,
a pallet, or a crate of equipment and just fly it just over there.
And so that's one of the areas that our team's looking at at
the moment.
All right. We might come to Tim Costley, Damien O'Connor, and Laura McClure
on defense DCP, and then we'll move to readiness and
ops.
And another supplement.
Yeah, I'll get to that under, because we're delving more into the ops in this
space.
Yep.
So,
two parts to this. The first part is just about the technical budget funding
for things in the DCP. So if I can start with that part.
I look at the vote defense this year covers things like
tranche one of the utility vehicle replacement.
You've got tranche three of network-enabled army, tranche one of
maritime helicopter replacement.
If I take that, that's just got
2.6 million for coming year. I assume that's for the project
costs, and what we're going to see is the capital funds injected as we
reach the different milestones in the project.
In this case, maritime, but a more broad question.
So we're going to see those out years get picked up in either future
announcements as money is allocated, like the recent one at Devonport.
I just want to check I've got that correct to start with.
Yeah, clearly there's going to be a mix of capital and operating expenditure,
and with that general trajectory in terms of the percentage of GDP increasing and
therefore in absolute terms, the dollars are increasing as well-
The situations as you've described, of course, that we will have opportunities
within that. Carefully, of course, from a taxpayer value perspective,
be making those acquisitions. I suppose the challenge
when one announces that one is after a particular capability and
one is as specific as one can be-
Mm
... one at the same time doesn't want to be too detailed about the
amount of funding that would be available to any given project within that because,
of course, in terms of the negotiations that we would want our people to have
on behalf of the New Zealand taxpayer and Defense Force, we don't want to
cause them to show their hand earlier than necessary.
So I suppose there will always be a degree of
clarity, but also
appropriate ambiguity about the allocation of amounts of
funding within an overall envelope budget by budget.
I don't know if you can-
Yeah. And so those out years are going to ...
Suddenly when chief of Navy goes to pick up some helicopters and
Secretary hands over a check, it's going to be pretty big, right?
We're going to see significant increases.
Yes.
There's a one-year number and a four-year number.
Yeah.
And they roll.
So I would expect in budget '27 the numbers will be different, and budget
'28, and that will very much depend upon where we are at any capability
point. So the payment, for example,
for a helicopter. Just in terms of the numbers for the Ministry of
Defense.
So there's $700 million worth of CapEx over four years
between the two entities,
of which $370 million is for defense-led projects, which
falls to the ministry. So there's another 330 million, which is
for capital, which is NZDF alone, over four
years. And for the coming year, it's
$279 million worth of CapEx for the
ministry, and that's largely
what the numbers that you were talking about.
But if you look at that four-year-
Yeah
... horizon, and for the minister's reason, without attaching
dollars, it's keeping the Canterbury and the frigates in
good working order. It's extending the life of the frigates.
It's surveillance in the southwest Pacific drones,
and it's polar surveillance.
Those are the big projects for the next four years, and you will see some of that
money coming through in a rolling way the further down that
pipeline we go.
So thank you. That confirms the technical bit.
The second half is the more conceptual part.
If I think about
chief of defense just mentioned
uncrewed systems, drones, that kind of thing,
and I was recently at ... Well, I visited Cyrus, I've been to
Kryptos, and Mile Electric to see some of the technology that's
there. This is evolving really quickly, right?
And if you look at, there's a new generation of counter drone
that's getting produced sort of every four months. It moves so fast.
You can think back to World War II, we had, what, 23 versions of the Spitfire
produced in five years, right? It moves quickly.
If we go and put all our eggs in one basket,
we could get the best thing that's out there, and then six months later we're out
of date.
Mm-hmm.
And yet the way that we've traditionally done things in New Zealand is we go out
and we buy something, and then we need it to last 25 years.
But technology is moving so quickly.
So what's the approach that we take to balance the need to get something good and
something quality, and yet we know that the longevity of that
capability isn't what it used to be?
Yeah. Can I answer that question as best I can at a
conceptual level, as you've invited me?
And if others have more details or specific examples, then it
will be helpful, I think, for the committee to hear that.
I think it seems to me, of course, there's a real paradox in needing to move
quickly, and we do need to move quickly because of the world in which we're living.
And we need to be agile,
and respond to the best available technology in 2026,
2027, and so on. But of course, where these are generational investments,
and some of them are, the Chief of Defense Force is of course right when he
says that we can't regard uncrewed
systems as a panacea.
Mm.
Then the question clearly for us, certainly at a political
decision-making level, is how do we
square that circle of needing longevity,
while at the same time moving quickly and to frankly fill gaps that will
appear of their own
accord, given the age of our existing systems?
I think the answer must be, in general terms, that we need to
acquire the systems that we need as best we can tell into the
future, but with a view to enabling them to
be future-proofed. And part of that might be around modularity.
It might be, for example, that naval vessels have the ability to insert,
and remove systems for particular taskings as required.
It might be that traditional naval platforms
not only conduct the types of
activities that they would under their own steam, so to speak.
It's not literally under their own steam anymore, sadly.
But in terms of their interoperability
and their ability to act as platforms for uncrewed systems.
So it might be that we don't know what the drone technology is
going to look like in 5 or 10 years, because goodness knows, in 5 or 10 months it
might be different. But we know that if we have a platform that has the ability to
launch uncrewed systems, be they subsurface, surface, or air,
then we'll give ourselves the best possible chance of remaining relevant
and credible and interoperable and interchangeable even with allies
into the future,
in a way that would otherwise require a crystal ball.
And if I can add to that,
the methodology of the 2025 Defense Capability
Plan is to pick up exactly the point that you are making.
So we now have two yearly reviews-
Mm
... to try and pick up both how the world is changing and how technology is
changing. And secondly, there is funding fidelity for
15 years out of 15 in a rolling way, because we don't want to
commit
To a 10-year plan and find halfway through technology has changed so
dramatically. So there is a broad envelope for 15
years, but there is fidelity for four so that we can
chunk up and be flexible depending on, A, the world, and B,
technology. So we've tried to structure that agility into the DCP
itself.
Yeah, I understand that, and I get big platforms have to last a long time, right?
But we see the rate that some technology moves.
Even if I look at the funding and the budget for ORX, which
is still extending out through the next few years, that's a project that's been
going since 2012 or something. But that's just trying to
get platforms up to the latest technology,
and yet it just seems to take such a long time to get...
It's difficult to open up
someone else's aircraft and change it maybe, but
are we agile enough?
So I'd say
you're exactly right.
Things are moving so quickly, we need to make sure our
processes, our teams, our focus, and our engagement with
industry takes account of that.
Some of the bigger uncrewed
systems have rudimentary functions that won't change.
They need to fly a long way, stay airborne for a long time, they need
to see things,
they need to report it back, and they need to do other things.
So some of that won't change, and you have to live with what you buy at the
time and make it last a few years.
Some of the smaller stuff, though,
you have to evolve, as we've seen on the battlefield of Ukraine,
and this is both in drone and counter-drone.
Yeah.
As you well know, some of that can be fielded and two months
later it's obsolete or it's been-
Totally
... it's been...
So part of our technology accelerator is making sure we're working with
industry to make sure we're talking to them, they're talking to us about what we
need for today and for this year, and how quickly can they
field something for us to try, and being in a technology
accelerator, by its nature, is experimental.
So we might field it, use it, try it, put it on the job while it's actually
being trialed, and then adapt it throughout a period of months or years.
But it might be superseded within a year and we have to
deal with that.
Understood.
Supplementary, Gregor Costa.
Yeah, and just largely answered, but within that KP, as the
technology changes and the contracts that we sign, and because
all this work will presumably be done
not by industry.
Have you got the
contracts we sign, are we able to sort of build that
flexibility into that? Because we sign off for something,
as Mr. Costa said, that won't be delivered for five years.
Is that being written into it?
It will require a new way of thinking and approaching this.
And the technology accelerator is not just about the kit
and the capability and the need it's trying, the itch it's trying to
scratch, but there's a whole lot of stuff that goes into it, and some of that is
exactly what you've said. How do we
as a defense force
that needs to keep up with this evolving
technology, but we need to keep up with the purchasing cycle, the
sustainment cycle. Contracts are part of that.
It's also market segmentation in a sense.
To the minister's point about drones versus exquisite technology,
we have to replace the Navy, but one ship over 10 years.
You sign a contract for a ship, I'm not talking about a frigate, for any ship,
and you have modularity or the ability to add to it.
It's a bit like building your house.
"Oh, gosh, we don't have enough plugs in the lounge.
We better put another 16 in." And before you know it, you're paying $15,000 extra.
So there's a matter of trying to find the sweet spot with these, the exquisite
technology to have enough certainty around scope and
specification that we don't drive price
to a level that we cannot afford. So it's a matter of trying to be quite
smart in this space.
So in relation to the capability plan, a couple of
questions. One is that I presume you are seeking advice from
as many players as you can, and the question is, are you
seeking advice from AUKUS, potential AUKUS partners?
If so, when and how did you get that advice,
Minister? And the second one is, in developing the plan,
particularly around the
unmanned equipment,
who's developing ethics for engagement?
Mm.
Because I hope you're not going to the Israelis for that.
But it is quite critical,
and I think for social license, that people know what will be the
ethical drivers of operational engagement for
autonomous
weapons.
Yeah, a very relevant and timely question, I think,
with a lot of discussion about the importance and the potential of
uncrewed systems.
And I hesitate even to say uncrewed because I don't want to-
Sorry, can I just... Sorry, Mr. Minister, can I just go back to the first one about
advice you may have received from AUKUS partners or potential-
Sure.
We might keep the second piece until the readiness operation's-
No, this is around the capability plan.
Yeah, the first part of your question is, yeah.
Yeah. And the second one is around developing ethical guidelines-
Yeah, for operations
...
Yeah.
No, it's for, I guess, for what might be in the capability
plan,
what are the options that we're looking at and the methods for
And how they're used on operations, so on.
I mean, we have to decide how to buy them first.
Yeah. It sounds to me, Mr. Chair, as though there's a few different things that
interconnect, so I'll do my best on both those.
And I suspect the Secretary of Defence might have some more detail
around the development of some of those ethical boundaries, if I can
use that phrase. In terms of AUKUS-
There are three
members of AUKUS, as we know, and the clue's in the title, of
course, they are Australia, the UK, and the US.
We, as a government, have no
commitments that we are able or willing to make at this
point. Clearly, we are interested to know
what is taking place under AUKUS, what you might call pillar one, the original
conception, of course, between those three nations for a particular
technology and platform.
Beyond that, in terms of what might be available for the participation of New
Zealand, again, no decisions have been made.
It's too early for us to even contemplate making decisions because we don't
yet know what it might entail
in that arrangement between those three nations.
So,
I appreciate the question, but it would be premature for me to speculate about what
that could look like.
Of course,
a Minister of Defence and a Ministry of Defence and a Defence Force are never short
of advice from partners, allies, friends, and indeed, all
other
entities or players who have
an interest in defence. So, there are lots of different
streams of advice about what we could do in the uncrewed space.
And the point that I was just starting to make before about uncrewed is, of course,
there's a range of different ways that we can operate systems.
We can have uncrewed or unmanned, sometimes referred to.
There can be remote systems, or there can be fully autonomous systems.
And the degree of control partly goes to what the technology allows
and what we want to be able to do to enable the work to be done with
the lightest touch possible. But of course, you raise a good point, and at this
point, I'll segue into the question you ask around
how we ensure... Excuse me, I'll paraphrase slightly.
But I think the thrust of your question is how we ensure that we are meeting
rules of engagement or our commitments under international law to ensure that
we are
operating in a theatre in a way that's consistent with what we
understand our rights and responsibilities to be.
Clearly, that's ongoing work as the technology itself develops.
But I know that careful thought is going into the doctrine, and the
tactics, and even the strategy about how those are deployed.
So, don't know if there's something that the SecDef would say
I would simply add, you're essentially talking, I think, about lethal autonomous
weapons systems or LAWS. And there was a
2021 Cabinet decision in New Zealand that
said that New Zealand should work with others to pursue legal instruments for the
regulating of
lethal autonomous weapons systems internationally.
And so in 2023, we engaged with the Dutch and the Koreans in
a lead initiative around responsible AI in the
military domain.
And in 2024, we joined a US-led political declaration on
responsible military AI and autonomy.
So we're trying to implement that 2021 Cabinet
mandate, which is still extant. That's one
answer. The second answer is the DCP contains money for drones, but
it's only for intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance.
It is not as a weapons system. So we are ourselves not
buying autonomous weapons systems.
We are buying drones to see and to carry, but not to
carry or to discharge weapons. The third thing is,
in the long-term insights brief, which was reported back to this committee earlier
in the year, we took great pains to talk about the importance of
norms, domestic laws, and international laws for
these sorts of weapons systems. We do not want
to walk blindly into the Wild West when it
comes to drones able to deliver
lethal payload
without a human actor being involved and without there being any laws or regulation
around them. Whether it's officials or politicians, I think we are absolutely
all of one mind
in that space. The last thing I would say is just on Israel.
We
cannot choose to purchase or not purchase based on country,
but we can choose based on product, and we can choose based on
international humanitarian law and other such things.
We are not purchasing anything from Israel, including in the drone space.
And what we do have with Israel is legacy systems where
Israel was a subcontractor to a major contractor.
So, for example, Lockheed Martin with the frigates,
years ago had bought some product from Israel, which sits on the
frigates, but that's not something that New Zealand either bought or
continues. That's a contractor arrangement.
Again, it's kind of set in stone.
All right. Laura McClure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just going back to the Defence Accelerator, and it's
probably going to cover this quite a bit.
I think it's a great opportunity to create a local defence industry,
and this might be for all of you to answer, but particularly you,
Minister. What work has been done with other ministries to
address issues that arise
when you are competing or you're starting out in the space?
Because when we go and talk to the likes of the growing industry,
there are regulatory burdens in New Zealand.
So there's issues like, are you talking to Ministry of Regulation about how we
can overcome some of those when it comes to testing products,
or even creating products? There's immigration issues, a
workforce that's actually able to be able to work in this kind of market
and field. We don't necessarily have the right capability there as a
country. And then that education piece, are we
talking to the universities about what the future engineers
that we're going to need or we're going to require?
Because why I say this is a great opportunity, my concern is that we'll
help establish these companies, and then inevitably they will go
offshore because that will be their most viable option for growth
given those
... those points that I've just pointed out.
So I'm not sure if there's any work with other ministries around that.
Yeah. Perhaps I can have the first go, Mr. Chair. Thank you for the question.
I think,
certainly you identify
an issue that, if we're not careful, will arise
for New Zealand Inc. Certainly, at a
political level, I know there's a whole of government determination that we
operate in a very smart and coherent fashion in this regard.
I know that the lessons of the AI
opportunities, but also challenges, risks,
are not unique to defense, as you've rightly highlighted.
I would say in terms of the deployment of defense assets that we
have already, including the persistent
surveillance
in the Pacific,
and closer to home,
is valuable not only to defense, for defense or defense's
known outputs, but of course, across police, across customs,
coast guard, if you want to obviously highlight a
search and rescue capability closer to home.
So there are a lot of ways that the agencies are
now beginning to understand together
the potential, including with the AI dimension.
And I know that ministerial colleagues in those
relevant areas are very minded to work with defense in
turn, to make sure that we are coordinated in that sense.
Certainly, I would be remiss if I didn't acknowledge the work of
Minister Mark Mitchell in terms of some of the
challenges that he knows police
face on behalf of our population who are vulnerable to the import of drugs.
And he happens to be a former minister of defense, so I know he really gets it from
that perspective as well. So that's an example of the collaboration and the
discussion that's ongoing to make sure that we respond to exactly the challenges
that you've highlighted, or opportunities indeed.
And through you, Mr. Chair, I'll just look to my left and right in case there's a
further comment.
Defense, Governor.
Just a few things. We're talking to MFAT about export controls-
Mm-hmm
... to make, and the US regime, to make sure that New Zealand firms can
export their goods into the US more easily, and other
places. We're talking to MB about how the defense capability
plan can feed back into domestic economic development, particularly-
Mm-hmm
... in the space area, but not exclusively.
We're working with NZTE to actually help firms export.
So NZTE has developed a, Trade Me Enterprise has developed
a new
branch or new area of expertise to focus on defense
exports.
And I just echo the minister, we're in constant contact with
particularly customs and police about what they need
from us,
and firms.
I do think, I just want to kind of underscore the point, there are things that
government can and should do, and can and should do better, and I believe that
we are on that path. But actually a key part of it is to open up a space
where firms can come to us
without us saying to them, "We know best."
And I think that that's key. That's the dynamism in this
ecosystem. We're giving firms a chance to say, "Have we got an idea for you?"
That's good.
Excellent. All right. We'll move to the defense readiness and operations section.
I know we've already traversed into that a fair bit.
Anyway,
Mr. Tuiono.
Yeah. Actually, mine was a supplementary.
So you might maybe want to ... Could I just ask the sup on that?
Was it actually a sup on there?
Oh, yeah. Okay. I was going back to at least from your earlier question, but-
Yeah.
Part of it was around
that readiness piece around whether, and I think
you talked about the disaster aid part of
it, and whether that's actually part of the thinking.
What we are seeing is more climate change-induced storms, things that we would
think would happen only once in every 20, 30 years, happening pretty much every
single year.
So I wanted to know how that has weaved into the way that you are
getting personnel ready, but also in terms of your procurement.
And I was really interested in that drone example as well.
Yeah.
Yes.
So the
core functions of the defense force are around
combat-
Yeah
... and security operations.
There will always be secondary functions for the
NZDF, and in peace time, those are the ones we use
the most, and that will never change.
So the ability for our sailors, soldiers, and aviators
to participate in disaster relief,
fisheries patrol, search and rescue, helping out around the
communities wherever we're needed,
whether it's in New Zealand or in the Pacific, is something that is programmed into
the DNA of the NZDF and will always be there.
So-
Probably my question was more about because it's accelerating, right?
So it's happening every year as opposed to
every five or six years, and how is that, has it got
any pickup in terms of making sure you're prepared to respond to what appear to
be annual events?
Yeah. Do you mind if I add and then throw to the Secretary of Defense?
I think certainly from what I have seen, wearing a different hat, which is
as Associate Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery, catchy title
as it is, I witnessed,
this year alone,
a huge
leap in the understanding and activity of
defense in terms of their
contribution to natural disasters of a severe weather
variety,
various places in the North Island in early 2026.
There is a seamless
understanding between NEMA and the New Zealand
Defence Force about
impending
cyclones and other weather events.
The pre-positioning in anticipation of requirements that may
arise-
In the far north, or on the east coast or elsewhere too, but
certainly with those particular areas having been hit hard.
The
degree of cooperation and joint understanding of those
not only looks good in terms of the coordination across government
and connecting a little bit with that theme that Ms.
McClure identified, but also to acknowledge your point about
the increasing frequency, there is an increasing responsiveness and
increasing preparation that has been very visible to me,
certainly, in terms of the way that they've responded, and I've got no doubt
they'll continue to do that.
And perhaps back to you for an answer.
I do, sorry. So,
there are obviously different types of
disasters every year around the September, October
period we get from NIWA and other experts,
and our own assessments of what the high-risk weather season will look like
for the coming 12 months.
I have a lot of faith in those predictions.
They're based on El Niño, La Niña,
and a range of other meteorological
phenomena.
And when they predict and say,
over the next eight months, you're likely to see this many cyclones
in these locations of this
level of
danger, they are pretty
accurate. And so what we do every year is we will apportion
how much of our
force,
typical go-tos are our C-130s,
our P-8s, our Kingairs, our NH90s,
our A109s, our sailors on ships, particularly
Canterbury, our soldiers, particularly our engineers.
Just about everyone in the Defence Force
will have a role on HADR somewhere along the lines if it occurs.
So,
just getting to your question, we apportion our effort very early on in the
season,
and we hope that those things don't happen, but generally, they do.
This year we have been, despite the unsettling weather and
atrocious weather earlier in the year in New Zealand,
we dodged the number of major cyclones that we were
expecting to see with our Pacific friends this year.
The other thing, though, is
just on disasters, it's not just weather events.
It's the tsunamis, it's the earthquakes, it's the volcanoes
in Tonga. And we always have to be mindful to save something in reserve
for if you get two of those things happening at the same time.
Thank you. I'm conscious you're working mightily to keep us to the agenda, Mr.
Chairman. Three things very quickly.
We have a broad-based Defence Force.
It operates at home, regionally and abroad.
It operates alone and with others and having to operate for longer.
So it's a high-utility force for a range of tasks.
But my key point is this one, the spectrum of tasks is changing.
There was a time where humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
was relatively straightforward.
Then you had transnational serious organized crime with others, then
you had peacekeeping, then you had peacemaking, and then you might have kinetic or
combat.
HADR, driven largely by climate change, has now become
a much more robust environment. Higher sea states, worse winds, more
turbulence.
Transnational serious organized crime. Why can't gangs get drones?
What would that look like
if cartels from Central and South America decided that they
would defend their assets by drone
technology? It's becoming harder. Peacekeeping.
What will it be like to contribute to peacekeeping in the Straits of Hormuz if
that decision were to be taken, or in Ukraine after a conflict,
or in Gaza, or in South Sudan, or in Yemen, or
in Haiti?
The point is that this Defence Force that was once upon a time able to say, "We
need something over here for when it's really tough, and a whole lot of stuff here
which is easy."
That easy to tough spectrum has shrunk
as technology and geopolitical arm wrestling
has grown. And so I think that's why this notion of a broad-based, high
utility, well-equipped Defence Force that can do a lot of things
in a lot of environments, alone or with others, for longer
periods of time is crucial because that spectrum is now not what it was.
Tim Costley.
I wanted to ask, it's a bit of a change in direction here,
about the Mission Command Training Center.
And this is in terms of the readiness,
and I notice there's funding for that in the budget this year.
Is that a leadership training center?
I just haven't heard of Mission Command Training Center.
Is that about leadership, or is it something more holistic in terms of
operational command?
It is a new concept, but it is a one-stop shop
to go in and
make sure that our people that deploy on complex missions have a
place with all the equipment, connectivity, and
ability to synthesize a deployed operation and conduct that
in one place. It's best practice overseas.
It'll save us money, time, and produce better and safer
operations effectively.
And so for the sake of people watching, mission command is the sort of the sense
that the concept mission command is, this is what we want you to achieve.
Now you go and do what you need to achieve it. It's an ethos, right?
Yeah.
So can you just expand for me?
You said it's best practice overseas. What does it look like?
It's not just training your leadership.
Is it training all people that are deploying, or is it training that is done as a
sort of a baseline across defence,
so that everyone is upskilled, or how does it work?
It'll be
designed particularly for specific missions.
But in general, it'll be top to bottom.
Generally from
unit level down or command level down, so brigade
use down. You won't see me up there, for instance, but we've got our own
facilities here. But,
yes, it's certainly going to get a lot of use, and we can't wait until it's
complete.
So is it an add-on to pre-deployment training?
Yes, it is. Yeah, it'll be part of that.
And is it physical, you're going there to practice
skills, or is it they're learning concepts, or they're just learning the--
they've been given information for that specific mission?
Can you-
Skills,
concepts, doctrine-
Right
... evolution, and rehearsals. I think we've
got the Chief of Army here as well, who can probably add a bit more specific detail
to that if you-
Sure
... would want.
I see a seat by chance. There's a seat-
Chief of Army
Thank you. What I would also add to that, it
allows for certification and training, and it's also connected with our partners.
So you can synthetically connect with the task that you've got given
and trained, review what you've done, address where there
are areas that you can improve on, and the like.
Can you just give us one practical example of
a mission, a current mission or a likely mission, and what it actually looks like
for your sailor or your soldier that's going?
Yeah. So, let's say we're deploying a combat team
overseas. As part of their pre-deployment training, they have a work-up.
You can use it both in the work-up to that and practicing, giving them a scenario
that they practice. You can also do that internationally.
So for example, if you're working up to exercise Talisman Sabre, which we
do with the Australians and other partners, you can link into that
beforehand synthetically, whilst you also have people in the
field conducting it as well. So it connects all of the people
through the operational effects they need to deliver, and you can
assess that, work out where the areas are that you need to work on or
conversely, if they're certified and meet the requirements.
Can I just-- final one, Mr. Chief, if I can.
Just,
I think for,
I don't know how many people are watching this, but just for them, there's a lot of
sort of
technical and trade terms in there.
But I remember seeing one in the UK where they called it judgmental training, but
they would literally come and fly in, and something would pop up, and could you
shoot it or could you not? It was sort of rules of engagement training.
It was scenario-based. Is it physically like that, or is it
more about how do we achieve the mission as a team, and what are you
empowered, when are you empowered to make decisions, when are you not?
Can you step us through what it looks like in practice?
I think you find it's a combination of both, and it will depend on what you're
trying to test at that point in time.
Right.
Yeah. And this does take the-- we've taken the
approach the Australians are using.
So this is almost a lift and deliver the exactly-
Okay
... same capability.
Thank you. Greg O'Connor.
Yes. So very well, your defense readiness, the
loss of the Manawanui,
how has that impacted
not only obviously you've a gap to fill in-
Yeah
... but the lessons learned from that too?
My understanding is that Manawanui was not
certified for the work it was doing.
Has that meant that there's now, as a result of that finding,
you've had to reevaluate a lot of the other work you're doing?
Certainly, defense in general, but Navy in particular, is
keen to understand the lessons that we need to learn, most
obviously to avoid the possibility, even the
possibility of such a repeat in the future.
I do need to be circumspect in terms of any comments I make about
the processes that have followed, including, for reasons of the court
martial process that's now ongoing, and I know you're not inviting me
to speak in a way that's constitutionally inappropriate.
Well, possibly the certification issue wouldn't necessarily be
relevant to the report.
Yeah. I think, I
would say there are a number of different factors that coincide, so
I'm probably err on the side of safety, so to speak, in that regard.
But if there's anything that the CDF or others
might
wish to speak in that regard, I suppose now would be-
So the
interim court of inquiry was released the following month after
we lost Manawanui.
At that point, and before that, as lessons
became obvious around the causes of
the loss of Manawanui, they were being implemented
from that moment on. We didn't wait till the end of the final report to
start that. We started that work as soon as we had an understanding of
what went wrong.
The Chief of Navy has put a significant amount of effort into what we
call seaworthiness and making sure that the lessons that affected
Manawanui have been scoured across the rest
of the Navy and our operations to make sure that none of those factors will
occur again or none of those factors are present in the rest of
the fleet. Just the first part of your question was
around the capability.
So, yes, the loss of Manawanui did have
some impact on the number of ships we could get to sea at any one time, and we have
worked hard to bring HMNZS Otago
out of its, what we call care and custody.
We had not enough sailors to keep that ship up and running, so we put it
effectively into floating storage.
We've been working hard over the last year to bring that ship up to readiness to
get it out, and it is nearly ready to get to sea again.
And the first places it will go
is into the Pacific and around the Pacific Islands to
monitor all kinds of fisheries and
support the Pacific Islands.
And was the Manawanui certified for the work it was doing?
It was certified for a lot of things, but there were some
parts where some crew members hadn't been signed off completely for-
For
what they were doing. That did factor into the
court of inquiry, but the leading cause of the
loss of that ship was around human factors on the ship on the day.
I'll be absolutely clear on that.
Oh. Honorable David McLennan. Just as a supplementary, and I go through the
readiness
levels provided here
by the different three forces.
The naval capability, given that the
information you've just given us, is very, very high,
except in the area of naval patrol capabilities for domestic regional
resource and border protection operations.
Arguably, what many people would consider as the most acute and
ongoing area-
Mm-hmm
... where the levels of readiness are very, very low.
Just over half, over 57%. The risk being right
up there. So
I'm just trying to invest- to tease out
the accuracy of these figures for you, given that
you indicated yourself there wasn't enough staff for the Otago, I
think it was.
Yes.
So,
crew and...
But all these other areas would say we're all up and running and ready.
Is this perhaps a little misleading?
No. Firstly, those figures are audited and scrutinized to
the nth degree, so we stand by those figures.
As a result of the high attrition, we had to
tie up several ships a few years
ago. So
as we build up
our recruitment,
work on our retention, and build our numbers of sailors, we can start to bring
some of those capabilities back online.
You will see those figures around maritime patrol improve
over the
coming year when HMNZS Otago comes
back online.
So it was just low because of that?
Well,
Manawanui wasn't a dedicated
maritime patrol vessel. It was a hydrography and survey
ship. But like any of our capabilities, it has
a lot of uses. So, it can be used for
presence operations or patrolling if needed.
It can be used for
diving. It could be used for hydrography.
It could be used for a range of things, just like Canterbury
can. We can conduct
multiple... Our diving capability, we can move between
ships. So it is sometimes quite difficult to
measure the figures.
It's like a Hercules.
It's got specific
transport roles, but it does search and rescue as well, and we don't build those
into those figures.
I appreciate that, but, I mean, the select committee, in its obligation to
scrutinize, has to rely on the figures.
So what you're implying is that Manawanui's almost just under
half of the capability around naval patrol,
domestic regional resource, and border protection.
Because we had at this committee, I think it was just one another one, we've got
an outbreak of methamphetamine use in this country,
and we're not quite sure how it's getting in, but it is.
This is part of the border protection system.
Yep.
And if it's down just over a half or just over 50%,
then we're just trying to tease that out, how that is
occurring in which you're not the sole
responsible agency for that border protection, but you
certainly keep part of it.
Sorry. So your specific question around maritime-
You're saying because the Manawanui was out, it was a multiple use
vessel-
Yep
... including maritime patrol here, and we're down to
57% readiness.
Yep. Mm-hmm.
And you kind of implied, well, that was because we've lost it.
When Otago comes back on, we'll be up at 100%, which is where everything
else is.
We
are measured at the end of the year on those, but when Otago comes back
online, we will certainly have more capability.
If you're concerned about support to
drugs flooding our borders and coming in, I can tell you now
that we have directed considerable effort of
defense people resources to support policing
customs around Op Kiwa, and I'd be very happy to give you a
briefing or the facts and figures on just how much we're doing in
that space.
And very briefly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
If you look at all the other areas, it looks as though except
for projection of sustainable capabilities prepared for
literal warfare support, which is down at 85%, all other areas of
naval capability and readiness are at 100%.
So,
implying almost we don't need to put more resources in
to what is a fully capable system.
That would probably not be right.
No. I would not draw that conclusion, no.
Okay.
Supplementary from Teanu Tuariki.
I think mine was a primary, so.
Oh, right.
Yeah.
Okay. Still on this area?
Okay. We're just running tight on time, members, so
go fire away.
Yeah. Mine was around the Army's bicultural plan.
I wanted to know where that's at. I've just got a newsroom article
in front of me and sort of just noting the-
Yes
... minister himself, Gosh, getting advice from his own brother, and just to
reassure the minister he's probably not the only one to get advice both wanted and
unwanted from ... one's relatives.
But I wanted to know where that's at.
I know for many of our personnel who are Māori, this forms an
important part of who we are. I've gone to major
tangihanga, and we see folks get up and do the haka, and it's a
beautiful thing.
Yeah.
So I wanted to know where you're at with that and how you're
juggling through that.
Yeah. Thanks very much for the question.
Clearly, it's hugely important, the relationship between
New Zealand Army and defence forces more generally.
But actually, a very particular special relationship with New Zealand Army and
the Māori population of New Zealand.
There's clearly a very
important historical, storied,
and hugely valuable contribution made by the 28th Battalion, the Second
World War, known of course as the Māori Battalion.
I think it might be helpful if the Chief of Army were to speak to some of that
special relationship, including the iwi status.
But, in terms of the
document that you've referred to,
clearly there's always a range of advice that one receives, both official and
unofficial. But I'm very satisfied that
the appropriate considerations are being taken into account.
It seems to me important that we have
a modern, capable army that prioritizes all
the kinds of considerations in terms of the way it respects and treats its
personnel.
And including
amongst that is the fact that there are
ways that the indigenous warrior culture
of New Zealand can be respected, included, and
highlighted. I don't think that's inappropriate at all, and I'd certainly support
a comment you've made about haka at tangihanga.
And actually, as recently as about a week ago, I had the privilege of attending
the graduation ceremony for new officers and sailors of the Royal New Zealand
Navy at Devonport. And in addition to the parade
ground drill, the reviewing of the parade, all the traditional elements that one
would expect in a military graduation or passing out
ceremony,
there were a number of different cultural elements, of which one was a highly
impressive haka that was performed by all of those new
officers and sailors. And frankly, it was
hugely impressive, and it adds to rather than
detracts from our defense forces,
to be able to incorporate cultural elements in a way that does not
detract from or is not inappropriately distracting from, of
course, the aims that we all share across those services,
and
will continue to prioritize for the benefit of our nation.
I will just pause there, if I may, Mr.
Chair, in case the Chief of Army was minded to say anything further in that
regard. But if not, or if in the interest of time you prefer me-
Yeah, we might keep going. Thank you.
In terms of the announcement earlier this week around the extension of some
deployments,
in the Middle East and Asia, can you just give us some context around the
importance of that for us contributing to those despite our small
scale? But not only those, also to other international efforts.
Yeah. Thanks very much, and thanks for noticing and
highlighting for the benefit of the committee and
those who are taking note, the important contribution that has been made and
is now continuing with the extension of those deployments.
Very specific details,
Chief of Defence Force would be better to describe those than
me. But certainly, I'd be remiss if I didn't take the opportunity to thank those
men and women who are away from home during those important
operations, and of course, the family and friends who support them in New
Zealand. I think the importance of the deployments is of
course, in those particular parts of the world.
We are contributing to regional security elsewhere, and of course, global
security overall. But I'd also make the point that for our Defence Force
to be exposed to a range of different environments,
to be interoperable and working alongside
like-minded nations in those different environments is actually beneficial for us
as a Defence Force in terms of our own
operational readiness for other tasking as well.
Thank you.
And then-
We might just leave it at that if we can.
Oh, sorry.
And we'll jump to the estate piece.
Conscious of time, and I want to get to veterans by
11:45.
Estate? Yes.
Oh, yeah, it can be a primary. So acknowledging improvement
of
the estate right across the
different places
as well. And you would've realized that
in previous sessions there have been concerns expressed about that, making sure
people have got nice warm houses. I was wondering about the
situation in Waiouru.
Yeah.
About where that's at. When's that coming?
Yeah, in terms of housing?
Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Really good point.
I'm pleased you followed up because Waiouru is an important resource
for our army and its people. The
discussions remain constructive and are
ongoing, with the hope that in the near future we'll be able
to say more publicly about exactly what an arrangement
looks like that will meet the needs of Army from our point of
view. But also acknowledging that oftentimes around
the defense estate, there are opportunities to partner with Kiwi to
provide in a suitably long-term way, housing that's suitable for our
people, but also is beneficial in other ways.
So we'll be able to say more about that soon, and I don't want to be coy
or cryptic
in front of the committee, except I need to say that I need to respect the fact
that those discussions are nearing completion now-
Nearing completion. So this year?
As soon as they're able to be completed and advised
publicly, then they will be.
Wonderful. Damien O'Connor.
Thank you. I know we've moved on to estate.
But the question relates to, is it estates, like there
is inadequate housing-
Real estate or facility. Is it inadequate training or
insufficient staff or inadequate equipment as
to why we only have 40% readiness for land
combat capabilities? So it's down at
45%, as I said,
and with the recent deployment, where does that leave us in terms of our
ability to respond
to something that might pop up in the near future in this world of
disruption? So that might be estate, but it could be one other
factors-
Yeah
... all of the above.
I'd say there are always a number and a range of factors that contribute to
operational readiness. Clearly, the estates, not only in terms of living
conditions, but of course, training,
and exercise facilities among them.
There was a useful discussion before around
command and other facilities that prepare personnel for operations,
and there's nothing particular I'd add to that at this point.
Our ability to
attract and retain is obviously those people, and
there's a lot of training required to get this age person, I guess, up to full
capability. So it's not a new issue, I
appreciate that. But the efforts and the investment
into which particular areas are going to lift that readiness back
up to where it should be?
Yeah. Can I simply say that there is no
defense base or facility around the country
that is in a perfect state. Indeed, a number of them are in
a state that might be described very fairly as imperfect.
Much work is needed. We are getting on with it, but we do not
say for a moment that we have completed that task.
It will be ongoing, of course, by its nature in the way that facilities always need
to be maintained well and upgraded and ultimately replaced.
We've started behind
the eight ball.
From my perspective, coming into government two and a half years ago and with
previous generations of decision-makers having deferred investment,
it's clear there's much more that we still need to do.
But I'm proud at the same time of the progress we have made in the last two and a
half years.
All right. Any further questions on estate or pretending to be related to estate?
It was a good-
It was. You did well. Yeah.
Okay. All right, we'll move to the veteran section. First question, Greg O'Connor.
Thank you, Minister.
Just
broadly around veterans, and my interactions with
current and ex-service members, effective transition.
So
we're trying to attract people in,
and often they'll spend some fairly good working years of their
lives leading up to getting to that 40 year where it's
actually quite hard to transition back into civilian life.
Not everyone can end up in Parliament.
Some would say that's an ineffective transition, some might have argued.
Police would have the same age and perhaps same thing.
But
just is there work going on in that area?
Because that
would obviously cross the
recruiting, particularly now the need for better
technical skills for people involved. Any comments on that?
Yeah. Thank very much for the question, and to the extent that there might be
parallels with other uniformed services, just acknowledge your own history in that
regard.
And
reasonable minds may differ on whether we've gone up or down in the world following
our time in those respective services.
Ask me next year, Minister.
Touché. Well, I became a lawyer and then a politician, so I don't know what comes
next logically in sequence, but-
Councilman
... again, others may decide.
I think the very serious-
Thing improved
... issue that you raise is around the way that we treat
people well when they walk through the main gate of the base for the
first time and then following a period of service, however long or short.
Of course, we need to consider that for that person and his or her
family and friends, of course, there's a continuum.
And so we
need not
consider that person as having
ceased to exist from the point of view of them having a
service number
and so on.
But I think it's fair to say while there has historically been a major gap in that
regard, the gap is closing. I know that's work that the defense force
takes really seriously. Anecdotally, but also in terms of official reports,
I've seen
considerable efforts being made along those lines.
And I would say that if I were to pass through to the
point at which a sailor, soldier, or aviator is no
longer in uniform, to consider the
contemporary veteran,
and to understand that he or she may not be as old
or have a particular set of experiences as those we might have
considered to be veterans growing up, of a World War II generation, in
the case of my grandparents, for example, is actually part of the way
that we can make sure that people feel proud of the service that they've
undertaken and know that New Zealand is proud and grateful
to them for it. And I think that part of the transition
is along those intangible lines, as well as the tangible
support and benefit that we accord to people when we allow them to
explore opportunities and support them into those following their time and
service.
Well, just to stop there, because about, I think, 12 to
14% of those with qualifying operation
experience are now
registered with Veterans' Affairs.
Does that coincide with your own figures?
It's a fairly low rate, and obviously, as I understand,
there's work now-
Going inter-agency work to ensure we pick up
those- Yeah ... individuals that might come into contact with other agencies-
Yeah ... who happen to be veterans. Yeah.
Is that work that you're aware of and is it- Yeah, very much so.
And depending on how you feel about it from a time perspective, Mr.
Chair, it might be that we have the Head of Veterans' Affairs join us. Yeah.
But certainly, can I say, I know there's a number of different initiatives.
Interestingly, two of the government agencies that need to talk well with each
other in this regard are the New Zealand Defence Force and Veterans' Affairs.
And historically, it's been the case that they have
had to operate in silos by reason of the Privacy Act precluding the
easy passage of information from one to the other.
And I'm pleased to say, before my time as minister, so I don't want
to claim credit for the work of others, but the information-sharing
agreement that
exists now across different government agencies so that veterans and
ex-service personnel have the benefit of a joined-up, coherent,
whole-of-government approach is now in place.
And yes, we've got work to do to get up to closer to 100% of
those on our books who wish to remain on our books.
But there have been positive moves in that regard.
And I will say that Mr. Alex Brunt and his team at Veterans' Affairs
have been very proactive about getting around the country, physically getting
around the country, making themselves available in communities, not
only in cities, but remote areas too, to say, "Here is what is available to you.
Here are support mechanisms through the New Zealand Government," but
also in terms of non-government organizations that can
usefully fill gaps for those who don't have that particular status as
well
as veterans under the Veterans' Support Act, I should add. So, Mr.
Chair, between you and Mr. O'Connor, don't know if you were- Sure.
Well, because I suppose that that inter-agency approach, Mr.
Brunt, and you're welcome, is that I note that
the funding has
reduced for that inter-agency approach in the
budget this year
for the advice. Do you-
Kia ora, committee. Good morning.
Alex Brunt, head of Veterans' Affairs, for the record.
I think just to summarize a couple of points.
While the uptake of the veteran support scheme sits at around
about 13% of veterans, we have around
20,000 to 22,000 veterans registered with us.
So of an estimated population of around about 45,000,
that's over 50%.
So that's the first thing. As the minister's
described, we put a lot of effort into
getting around the country through forums and outreach opportunities.
That's also
had a lot of effort being put in place over the last year around the seamless
transition of information and data flow from NZD.
So when a service person gets qualifying operational service now,
Veterans' Affairs are automatically notified. We register that person.
They will get a pin and a certificate,
and they are then in our registration system.
So that data flow now happens seamlessly.
In terms of incorporating NGOs into the picture,
a lot more work has been done, so the fund has actually increased for
next year. There's a contestable grant of 150,000,
which will enable us to collaborate more with NGOs.
But in terms of actually getting better system
interoperability, our focus is on a
ICT upgrade, which doesn't normally get people excited.
But you will have heard at the committee before that largely we're in
a pen and paper era, and our current system doesn't connect up.
So we are replacing that system with a new system that will go
live in two years' time,
and that will give us the ability for NGOs to dock
directly into it. Someone is sitting with a veteran anywhere
around the country,
they will be able to fill in that form, and it will come directly
into VA.
So could someone being who?
Well, absolutely anyone. So iwi sit down with veterans,
the Returned Services' Association sit down with veterans.
But essentially, the forms will be online.
You won't have to download something in paper.
You'll be able to sit with a veteran online, fill it in, and then that
information will come directly into Veterans' Affairs, and it will be able to be
triaged that day.
So that will be a vast quantum leap forward for us.
And it's part not just of being able to collaborate more with
NGOs, but it's about being able to be more responsive and
agile with potentially
if we have more sizable requirements.
Minister, is it the case that a potential reduction in funding doesn't
necessarily mean a reduction in output, and that
big dollars is not necessarily a signal of
success, but rather the delivery of services and potential for
efficiency gains? Yeah, I think that's absolutely right, Mr. Chair.
I think importantly, placing the money in the right place.
We could have
more resource opening
envelopes containing paper forms and being entered in manually,
in a way that might
represent some kind of gains. But I think the kind of technological transformation
that Mr. Brunt's described is actually much more helpful.
But I would also make the other point that the cooperation across different
government agencies and with the NGO sector being crucial as well,
again, isn't necessarily represented in budget allocations.
But through the Te Arataki Symposium, for example,
that really heavily focuses on the mental health needs of contemporary
and older veterans, provides a huge amount of value
to the veterans community in a way that goes beyond the way that we might measure,
obviously, in a budget, in dollar terms.
Yeah, but given the state of defense-
Sorry, next question, Tim Costley.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
CDF, I think possibly for you, but I wanted to raise a question that a number of
people have raised with, uh, me. And so I thought this is an
opportune time to, to, to pass it on,
which relates to not just veterans, but how we recognize the service
of past and present service persons, specifically
around Royal honors. And if we look at the last few,
um, lists that have come out both at New Year's and at King's Birthday,
I think King's Birthday had two, New Year had one.
Um,
is, is, is it getting harder to get Defence Force
service people and veterans through that process, or are
we just not nominating them?
We are nominating.
Um,
we are putting a lot of effort into the way we write
and, um,
and vet and consider
and filter the various awards that come through for various different
levels. Um, last week, for instance, um, I, uh, presided
over a ceremony which gave out, um, 11 CDF
commendations,
uh, and a, uh, Defense Meritorious Service Medal.
Um, the Vice Chief of Defense Force behind me chairs the,
um, Honors and Awards Advisory Committee two,
sometimes three times a year.
Um, this is more than we have seen, uh, in the
past. Um,
the, the, the numbers
around, um, defense
decorations, DSDs or MNZMs has stayed
pretty static over the last, uh, few years.
It would always be good to have, uh, more of those get through and
considered by the honors,
uh, by, by the, um, by APH.
Um,
I think just one more point for consideration is
that from COVID onwards, um,
we did see a reduction in the number of our,
uh, deployments,
um,
number of people able to deploy or new deployments.
Um,
uh, that has picked up since COVID again, and we're--
the government has just renewed a number of mandates for ongoing ones.
Sometimes the, the apps for which our service
people, uh, would receive a commendation or an
award, um, take a while to, to
get through the system.
Um, so there is a bit of time lag there, but, um, I think if I was to
show you the,
the numbers of CDF commendations, service chief
commendations, other commendations,
Defense Meritorious Service Medals, DSDs
and Royal Honors, I think you'll find it's been pretty consistent
over the last six years.
Yeah, I think the, the, the argument they make and, and they would point back to
changes even back in the '90s and, you know, where it used to be early
2000s, uh, significantly more people
on the actual honors list. And, um, I, I
think I'm trying to characterize their words, but the argument is that the,
some of the defense internal ones that,
with no disrespect, CDF commendations don't carry the same weight
as as,
a- a- as the, you know, even a level five or six honor-
Mm
... um, in the old system. So is it--
I know, I, I think their argument would be, you know, you look at people that
perform really well in their sporting environments.
You look at people that perform well
or have just served their community on various clubs and groups and, and deserve
their King's Service Medal or whatever, or their MNZM, whatever they re-
received. But there are a number of people, and you've spoken yourself about the
talented people you have and you want to retain and recognize, um, that serve
within defense, within the, you know,
10, 12,000 service persons that you have, that,
that don't seem to proportionately get that same recognition.
So is there a way that we can... Or is this the function of what we have?
Some might say they need to up their level of political donations to political
parties.
Oh, yeah. That's what they want.
I don't think anyone would say that.
No?
No, I don't think there's ever been a-
Yes, there is
... case.
So, um, yes, I would agree with your observation.
If you compared it to, say, 20 or 30 years ago, the number of Royal Honors
or less higher-level honors is, um, is lower today.
Um, yes, I would like to see, uh, more of our DSDs
getting up and through the, um, appropriate committees for recognition,
and more people actually being recognized with DSDs.
Right. Greg has one.
Yeah. I, so I can't help but wondering some of the issues are a little bit deeper
than that with veterans, um, rather than medallic recognition.
Um, because one of the biggest issues, of course, has been that following
the, um, Maura Gardner case, um, and
the
findings by... that, that really we need to be,
um, more generous probably, um, and
in our interpretation, um, of what veterans
require and what treatment should be required.
Have the, the funding and the, the, the, the sort of
focus,
um,
extended? I mean,
given-
Yeah
... you know, there's quite big implications of that case.
Are you satisfied that we're going to have the ability to really
fully-
Um, well, I suppose work
on the implications of that case.
Yeah, thank you for the question. Yes, of course, the importance of the litigation
relating to the estate of Tawera Gardiner, um, was significant.
The government has been responding in a way that is consistent with the
ruling of the court.
Notwithstanding that prior to that, there had been a different
understanding of what Parliament had intended in passing the Veteran Support Act
2014. Additional money has been provided in the budget by
way of allowing increased capacity to
process the additional claims that have been made.
Of course, within a period of even 12 months or so since that
decision had been made, it's been necessary to
try to understand the effect of the ruling in terms of the number of people who
previously had claims
that were not accepted that now, as a result of the ruling, would be.
And so, that's a complex area, and we're seeing that play out in real
time. But I do want to take the opportunity to commend Veterans' Affairs for
responding very effectively to that.
And of course, we'll provide the necessary resource to meet our legal and
moral obligations to our veterans,
regardless of what interpretation of that legislation may be preferred.
And will veterans be required to reapply, or will those previous
applications be sufficient to
be revisited?
Where a veteran has had a decision made on their claim, they would need
to reapply to the department.
All right. Te Ururoa.
Yeah,
just sort of some of the constituents and veterans who have been in
contact with me as well. So, I've got a couple of quick questions, which
you might have quick answers for.
Okay.
One of them is actually in an email that's sitting on your desk-
Ah, okay
... so I might be a little bit more
fuller there. One of them was sort of following up from what Greg was saying
around the
Veterans' Support Act. Are you looking at reviewing it?
Is it fit for purpose given
what happened with the Tawera Gardiner case?
So, some quick comments there as well.
And another one was around
whether
Veteran Affairs will adopt statements of principle used in Australia for traumatic
brain injuries-
Ah
... and injuries caused by toxic gases from the soldiers.
Yeah.
I have two questions that-
Yeah. Thank you
for the questions. I think I can answer them quite quickly. Mr.
Chair, and I'm conscious of your timing.
On the second one first, I don't want to be specific about the scientific or
medical basis for particular statements of principle, but I will say that
those do reflect, um, and they are updated from time to time in a way that
reflects the shared understanding between New Zealand and Australia.
In terms of the prospect that we might
review the Veterans' Support Act, post Tawera Gardiner's
litigation, but also more generally, I think it's always the case
that ministers and agencies should think about ensuring
that their legislation is appropriate and fit for purpose.
So, there's nothing to preclude us continuing to consider that
matter. Whether or not a formal review
would be necessary at this time, I think I would acknowledge that there have been
broad discussions about recognition and
support to veterans raised recently, um,
in the Patterson Review at one point, not that long ago.
But also in terms of
broader discussions about whether a covenant relationship exists between the people
and government of New Zealand on the one hand and ex-service personnel on the
other. And we've had some things to say about that, and I'm committed to ensuring
that recognition as well as support, with a capital S, per the act,
is provided to our ex-service personnel.
All right. Thank you very much. Members, that brings us to the end of the session.
Minister, thank you very much for your time today and your comprehensive answers.
We really appreciate that. Thank you also for contributions from NZDF,
MoD, and Veterans' Affairs. And can I just, on behalf of the committee,
extend our thanks for the service of all current
defense personnel and, indeed, the veterans that have served in the past.
Really appreciate their ongoing contribution.
Thank you, Chair.
Thank you.